Background: My name is Aarush Doshi and I am in 11th grade. I did this project for a science research class. I am relatively new to machine learning and programming in general, so I am looking for any suggestion or feedback with either my project or with how I can continue developing my skills.
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a machine learning technique which was used in this project to create a framework that classifies Martian imagery. It categorizes images into separate surface landmarks, such as Impact Ejecta or Slope Streak. The key components of constructing this framework include: loading the data into the Python environment, separating the data into training and validation portions, creating a basic neural network, analyzing the outputs (e.g., training/validation accuracy, training/validation loss), and refining the CNN to better suit the data. After completing this process, it was determined that the most effective model consisted of 4 2-dimensional convolutional layers, 1 dense layer, and a layer size of 64 neurons. A successful framework was also created which, when modified, can be used as a template for any image classification problem. Out of the multiple models tested, there was a clear distinction between which models were suitable and which had issues with accuracy or overfitting (when the CNN memorizes the training data). In order to better evaluate the effectiveness of each model, a basic linear regression was created which compared the association between the accuracy and categorical cross entropy loss (a measure of the distance between the prediction and the true value). This allowed for a visual representation of how the loss changes as accuracy increases. The models which achieved correlation coefficients close to -1 were generally more optimal for the classification. This CNN also has the potential to categorize Martian surface imagery from other datasets.
